B. TERRORIST FINANCING
1. Sources and methods
The funding of terrorist organisations is made from both legal and illegal revenue
generating activities. Criminal activities generating such proceeds include
kidnappings (requiring ransom), extortion (demanding “protection” money),
smuggling, thefts, robbery and narcotics trafficking. Legal fund raising methods used
by terrorist groups include:
i. collection of membership dues and/or subscriptions,
ii. sale of books and other publications,
iii. cultural and social events,
iv. donations,
v. community solicitations and fund raising appeals.
Funds obtained from illegal sources are laundered by terrorist groups by the
same methods used by criminal groups. These include cash smuggling by couriers
or bulk cash shipments, structured deposits to or withdrawals from bank accounts,
purchases of financial instruments, wire transfers by using “straw men”, false
identities, front and shell companies as well as nominees from among their close
family members, friends and associates.
2. Non-profit organisations
Non–profit and charitable organisations are also used by terrorist groups as a
means of raising funds and/or serving as cover for transferring funds in support of
terrorist acts. The potential misuse of non-profit and charitable organisations can be
made in the following ways:
i. Establishing a non-profit organisation with a specific charitable purpose but
which actually exists only to channel funds to a terrorist organisation.
ii. A non-profit organisation with a legitimate humanitarian or charitable purpose is
infiltrated by terrorists who divert funds collected for an ostensibly legitimate
charitable purpose for the support of a terrorist group.
iii. The non-profit organisation serves as an intermediary or cover for the movement
of funds on an international basis.
iv. The non-profit organisation provides administrative support to the terrorist
movement.
3.
Unusual characteristics of non-profit organisations indicating that the they may be
used for an unlawful purpose are the following:
i. Inconsistencies between the apparent sources and amount of funds raised or
moved.
ii. A mismatch between the type and size of financial transactions and the stated
purpose and activity of the non-profit organisation.
iii. A sudden increase in the frequency and amounts of financial transactions for the
account of a non-profit organisation.
iv. Large and unexplained cash transactions by non-profit organisations.
v. The absence of contributions from donors located within the country of origin of
the non-profit organisation.