PART II ONLIGED ENTITY’S OBLIGATIONS
Paragraph 5 Board of directors’ responsibilities
Paragraph 6 Obligations of the internal audit department
Paragraph 7 Customers’ acceptance policy


PART II
OBLIGED ENTITY’S OBLIGATIONS
Board of directors’
responsibilities
5. The Obliged Entity’s board of directors:
(a) Determines, records and approves the general
policy principles of the Obliged Entity in relation to the
prevention of money laundering and terrorist financing
and communicates them to the compliance officer.
(b) Appoints a compliance officer and, where is
necessary, alternate compliance officer, assistant
compliance officers and determines their duties and
responsibilities, which are recorded in the risk
management and procedures manual of paragraph
9(1)(c).
(c) Approves the risk management and procedures 
manual of paragraph 9(1)(c), which is communicated to
all employees of the Obliged Entity, that manage,
monitor or control in any way the customers’
transactions and have the responsibility for the
application of the practices, measures, procedures and
controls that have been determined.
(d) Ensures that all requirements of the Law, especially
article’s 58, and of the present Directive are applied,
and assures that appropriate, effective and sufficient
systems and controls are introduced for achieving the
abovementioned requirement.
(e) Assures that the compliance officer, the alternate
compliance officer and his assistants and any other
person who has been assigned with the duty of
implementing the procedures for the prevention of
money laundering and terrorist financing, have
complete and timely access to all data and information
concerning customers’ identity, transactions’
documents and other relevant files and information
maintained by the Obliged Entity so as to be fully
facilitated in the effective execution of their duties.
(f) Ensures that all employees are aware of the person
who has been assigned the duties of the compliance
officer, alternate compliance officer, as well as, the
compliance officer’s assistants, to whom they report,
according to paragraph 9(1)(e) any information
concerning transactions and activities for which they
have knowledge or suspicion that might be related to
money laundering and terrorist financing
(g) Establishes a clear and quick reporting chain based
on which information regarding suspicious transactions
is passed without delay to the compliance officer, either
directly or through his assistants and notifies
accordingly the compliance officer for its explicit
prescription in the risk management and procedures
manual of paragraph 9(1)(c).
(h) Ensures that the compliance officer and the
alternate compliance officer has sufficient resources,
including competent staff and technological equipment,
for the effective discharge of his duties.
Designation of
Board of Directors
Member
(Article 58D of the
Law)
5 A
(i) Assesses and approves the Annual Report of
paragraph 10 and takes all action as deemed
appropriate under the circumstances to remedy any
weaknesses and/or deficiencies identified in the Annual
Report.
Without prejudice to the provisions of section 58D of
the Law, the designated member of the board of
directors, that is referred to in the said section, may
either be an executive or a non executive member. The
Obliged Entity’s board of directors determines the
policies and procedures to ensure the application of the
provisions of section 58D of the Law, that are stated in
the risk management and procedures manual referred
to in paragraph 9(1)(c). The said person may perform
additional duties, where appropriate, taking into
account the nature and the size of the activities of the
Obliged Entity.
Obligations of the
internal audit
6. The internal audit department of the Obliged Entity reviews 
department
R.A.D. 125/2020
and evaluates, at least on an annual basis, the
appropriateness, effectiveness and adequacy of the policy,
practices, measures, procedures and control mechanisms
applied for the prevention of money laundering and terrorist
financing. The findings and observations of the internal auditor
are submitted, in a written report form, to the board of
directors which decides the necessary measures that need to
be taken to ensure the rectification of any weaknesses and/or
deficiencies which have been detected. The minutes of the
abovementioned decision of the board of directors and the
internal auditor’s report are submitted to the Commission
within twenty days from the relevant board meeting and not
later than four months from the end of the calendar year.
Customers’
acceptance policy
7. (1) According to paragraph 9(1)(b), a clear customers’
acceptance policy is developed and established, which is
completely in line with the provisions of the Law and the
present Directive. The customers’ acceptance policy is
prepared after detailed assessment of the risks faced by the
Obliged Entity from its customers and/or their transactions
and/or their countries of origin or operations, as these are
stated in Part IV
(2) The customers’ acceptance policy set in an explicit
manner, at least the following:
(a) the criteria for accepting new customers;
(b) categories of customers who are not acceptable for
establishing a business relationship or an execution of
an occasional transaction;
(c) criteria for categorisation of customers on a risk 
basis in at least three categories:
i. low risk,
ii. normal risk,
iii. high risk.
(3) The customers’ categories of subparagraph 2(b) and (c), 6.
take into consideration factors such as the customer’s
background, type and nature of its business activities, its
country of origin, the services and the financial instruments
applied for, the anticipated level and nature of business
transactions as well as the expected source and origin of
funds



