PART III COMPLIANCE OFFICER
Paragraph 8 Appointment of compliance officer, alternate compliance
officer and -assistants of compliance officer
Paragraph 9 Compliance officer’s duties
Paragraph 10 Compliance officer’s Annual Report
Paragraph 11 Monthly prevention statement

PART ΙΙΙ
COMPLIANCE OFFICER
Appointment of
compliance officer,
alternate
compliance officer
and assistants of
compliance officer
(section 69 of the
Law)
8. (1) According to paragraph 5(b) a compliance officer is
appointed, who belongs to the senior management of the
Obliged Entity so as to command the necessary authority.
(2) The Obliged Entity should appoint an alternate compliance
officer, in case the compliance officer is absent, who should
replace him temporarily, perform his duties as defined in the
present Directive and the Law and fulfil the conditions of
appointing a compliance officer. The Obliged Entity may
outsource, as well, the function of the alternate compliance
officer only if a natural person is appointed. The Obliged Entity
records in the risk management and procedures manual
referred to in paragraph 9(1)(c) the procedures it intends to
apply for the said appointment.
(3) According to paragraph 5(b), where it is deemed
necessary due to the volume and/or the geographic spread of
the services/activities, assistants of the compliance officer are
appointed, by geographical district or otherwise for the
purpose of assisting the compliance officer and passing
internal suspicion reports to him.
(4) The Obliged Entity communicates immediately to the
Commission, the names, the positions, as well as, the contact
details of the persons it appoints as compliance officer,
alternate compliance officer and assistants of the compliance
officer.
Compliance
officer’s duties
9. (1) As a minimum, the compliance officer’s duties include the
following:
(a) Designs, based on the general policy principles of
paragraph 5(a), the internal practice, measures,
procedures and controls relevant to the prevention of
money laundering and terrorist financing, and
describes and explicitly allocates the appropriateness
and the limits of responsibility of each department that
is involved in the abovementioned.
It is provided that, the above include measures and
procedures for the prevention of the abuse of new
technologies and systems providing financial services,
for the purpose of money laundering and terrorist
financing (e.g. services and transactions via the
internet or the telephone), as well as measures so that
the risk of money laundering and terrorist financing is
appropriately considered and managed in the course of 
daily activities of the Obliged Entity with regard to the
development of new products and possible changes in
the Obliged Entity’s economic profile (e.g. penetration
into new markets).
(b) Develops and establishes the customers’
acceptance policy, according to paragraph 7 and
submits it to the board of directors of the Obliged Entity
for consideration and approval.
(c) Prepares a risk management and procedures
manual regarding money laundering and terrorist
financing. The said manual includes, inter alia, the
details referred to in paragraphs 5(a), 5(g), 7, 9(1) and
Parts IV, V, VI and VII.
(d) Monitors and assesses the correct and effective
implementation of the policy, according to paragraph
5(a), the practices, measures, procedures and controls
of point (a) and in general the implementation of the
risk management and procedures manual of point (c).
In this regard, applies appropriate monitoring
mechanisms (e.g. on-site visits to different departments
of the Obliged Entity) which will provide him all the
necessary information for assessing the level of
compliance of the departments and employees of the
Obliged Entity with the procedures and controls which
are in force. In the event that he identifies shortcomings
and/or weaknesses in the application of the required
practices, measures, procedures and controls, gives
appropriate guidance for corrective measures and
where deems necessary informs the board of directors.
(e) Receives information from the Obliged Entity’s
employees, which is considered to be knowledge or
suspicion of money laundering or terrorist financing
activities or might be related with such activities. The
information is received in a written report form
(hereinafter to be referred to as "Internal Suspicion
Report"), a specimen of such report is attached in the
First Appendix.
Second Appendix
(f) Evaluates and examines the information received as
per point (e), by reference to other relevant information
and discusses the circumstances of the case with the
informer and, where appropriate, with the informer’s
superiors. The evaluation of the information of point (e)
is been done on a report (hereinafter to be referred to
as "Internal Evaluation Report"), a specimen of which is
attached in the Second Appendix.
Third Appendix
(g) If following the evaluation described in point (f), the
compliance officer decides to notify MOKAS, then he
completes a report and submit it to MOKAS the
soonest possible through the electronic page goAML
(https://reports.mokas.law.gov.cy/live)(hereinafter to be
referred to as "Compliance Officer's Report to the Unit
for Combating Money Laundering”). The Obliged Entity
should implement a system that will allow it to produce
the said report in a printed form at any time.
It is provided that, aafter the submission of the
compliance officer’s report to MOKAS, the accounts
involved and any other connected accounts, are closely
monitored by the compliance officer and following any
directions from MOKAS, thoroughly investigates and
examines all the transactions of the accounts.
(h) If following the evaluation described in point (f) the
compliance officer decides not to notify MOKAS, then
he fully explains the reasons for such a decision on the
"Internal Evaluation Report" which is attached in the
Second Appendix.
(i) Acts as the first point of contact with MOKAS, upon
commencement and during an investigation as a result
of filing a report to MOKAS according to point (g).
(ι) Ensures the preparation and maintenance of the lists
of customers categorised following a risk based
approach, according to paragraph 7(2), which contains,
inter alia, the names of customers, their account
number and the date of the commencement of the
business relationship. Moreover, ensures the updating
of the said lists with all new or existing customers, in
the light of additional information obtained.
(j) Detects, records, and evaluates, at least on an
annual basis, all risks arising from existing and new
customers, new financial instruments and services and
updates and amends the systems and procedures
applied by the Obliged Entity for the effective
management of the aforesaid risks.
Fourth Appendix
(k) Verifies that the third party with whom the Obliged
Entity intends to rely on for the application of the
customer identification and due diligence measures as
laid down in sub-paragraphs (a), (b) aid (c) of
paragraph (1) of section 61 of the Law, is Obliged
Entity, as defined in section 2A of the Law, and gives
his/her written approval for the said reliance, which
should be kept in the personal file of the third party. l
(l) Ensures that the branches and subsidiaries of the
Obliged Entity that operate in countries outside the
European Economic Area, have taken all necessary
measures for achieving full compliance with the
provisions of the present Directive, in relation to
customer identification, due diligence and record
keeping procedures.
(m) Provides advice and guidance to the employees of
the Obliged Entity on subjects related to money
laundering and terrorist financing.
(n) Acquires the required knowledge and skills for the
improvement of the appropriate procedures for
recognising, preventing and obstructing any
transactions and activities that are suspected to be
associated with money laundering or terrorist financing.
(o) Determines the Obliged Entity ’s departments and
employees that need further training and education for
the purpose of preventing money laundering and
terrorist financing and organises appropriate training
sessions/seminars. In this regard, prepares and applies
an annual staff training program, according to Part VIII.
Assesses the adequacy of the education and training
provided.
(p) Prepares correctly and submits timely to the
Commission the monthly prevention statement of
paragraph 11 and provides the necessary explanation 
to the appropriate employees of the Obliged Entity for
its completion.
(q) Prepares the annual report according to paragraph
10.
(r) Responds to all requests and queries from MOKAS
and the Commission, provides all requested
information and fully cooperates with MOKAS and the
Commission.
(s) Maintains a registry which includes the reports of
points (e), (f) and (g), and relevant statistical
information (department that submitted the internal
report, date of submission to the compliance officer,
date of assessment, date of reporting to MOKAS), the
evaluation reports of point (d) and all the documents
that verify the accomplishment of his duties specified in
the present subparagraph.
(t) Maintains a registry with the data/information of the
third parties, that the Obliged Entity relies on for the
application of customer identification procedures and
customer due diligence measures according to section
67 of the Law, as defined in paragraph 25 of the
Directive.
(2) During the execution of his duties and the control of the
compliance of the Obliged Entity with the Law and the present
Directive, the compliance officer obtains and utilises data,
information and reports issued by international organizations,
as these are stated in paragraph 17.
Compliance
officer’s annual
report
10. (1) The Annual Report, prepared by the compliance officer
according to paragraph 9(1)(q), is a significant tool for
assessing the Obliged Entity’s level of compliance with its
obligations laid down in the Law and the present Directive.
(2) The Annual Report is prepared and submitted for approval
to the board of directors, within two months from the end of
each calendar year (the latest by the end of February).
(3) The Annual Report, after its approval by the board of
directors, is submitted to the Commission together with the
minutes of the meeting, during which the Annual Report has
been discussed and approved. It is provided that the said
minutes include the measures decided for the correction of
any weaknesses and/or deficiencies identified in the Annual
Report and the implementation timeframe of these measures.
These minutes and the Annual Report are submitted to the
Commission within twenty days from the date of the relevant
meeting, and not later than three months from the end of the
calendar year.
(4) The Annual Report deals with money laundering and
terrorist financing preventive issues pertaining to the year
under review and, as a minimum, covers the following:
(a) Information for measures taken and/or procedures
introduced for compliance with any amendments and/or
new provisions of the Law and the present Directive
which took place during the year under review.
(b) Information on the inspections and reviews
performed by the compliance officer, reporting the
material deficiencies and weaknesses identified in the
policy, practices, measures, procedures and controls
that the Obliged Entity applies for the prevention of
money laundering and terrorist financing. In this regard,
the report outlines the seriousness of the deficiencies
and weaknesses, the risk implications and the actions
taken and/or recommendations made for rectifying the
situation.
(c) The number of internal suspicion reports submitted
by employees of the Obliged Entity to the compliance
officer, according to paragraph 9(1)(e), and possible
comments/observations thereon.
(d) The number of Reports submitted by the
compliance officer to MOKAS, according to paragraph
9(1)(g) with information/details on the main reasons for
suspicion and highlights of any particular trends.
(e) Information, details or observations regarding the
communication with the employees on money
laundering and terrorist financing preventive issues.
(f) Summary figures, on an annualised basis, of
customers' total cash deposits in Euro and other
currencies in excess of the set limit of 10.000 Euro
(together with comparative figures for the previous
year) as reported in the Monthly Prevention Statement
of paragraph 11. Any comments on material changes
observed compared with the previous year are also
reported.
(g) Information on the policy, measures, practices,
procedures and controls applied by the Obliged Entity
in relation to high risk customers as well as the number
and country of origin of high risk customers with whom
a business relationship is established or an occasional
transaction has been executed.
(h) Information on the systems and procedures applied
by the Obliged Entity for the ongoing monitoring of
customer accounts and transactions.
(i) Information on the measures taken for the
compliance of branches and subsidiaries of the Obliged
Entity , that operate in countries outside the European
Economic Area, with the requirements of the present
Directive in relation to customer identification, due
diligence and record keeping procedures and
comments/information on the level of their compliance
with the said requirements.
(j) Information on the training courses/seminars
attended by the compliance officer and any other
educational material received.
(k) Information on training/education and any
educational material provided to staff during the year,
reporting, the number of courses/seminars organised,
their duration, the number and the position of the
employees attending, the names and qualifications of
the instructors, and specifying whether the
courses/seminars were developed in-house or by an
external organisation or consultants.
(l) Results of the assessment of the adequacy and
effectiveness of staff training.
(m) Information on the recommended next year’s
training program.
(n) Information on the structure and staffing of the
department of the compliance officer as well as
recommendations and timeframe for their
implementation, for any additional staff and technical
resources which may be needed for reinforcing the
measures and procedures against money laundering
and terrorist financing.
Monthly prevention
statement
R.A.D. 282/2024
11. The compliance officer prepares and submits to the
Commission, according to paragraph 9(1)(p), on a monthly
basis, the Monthly Prevention Statement, which includes
details for the total cash deposits accepted by the Obliged
Entity, the Internal Suspicions Reports, and the Compliance
Officer’s Reports to MOKAS, according to paragraphs 9(1)(e)
and 9(1)(g), respectively. The Monthly Prevention Statement
is completed and submitted to the Commission within fifteen
(15) days from the end of each month. The completion of the
said Statement provides the opportunity to the Obliged Entity
initially to evaluate and, subsequently, to reinforce its systems
of control and monitoring of its operations, for the purpose of
early identification and detection of transactions in cash which
may be unusual and/or carry enhanced risk of being involved
in money laundering and terrorist financing operations.