PART VIII EMPLOYEES’ OBLIGATIONS, EDUCATION AND
TRAINING
Paragraph 34 Employees’ obligations
Paragraph 35 Employees’ education and training program
Employees’
obligations
34. (1) The Obliged Entity’s employees can be personally liable
(section 58 of the
Law)
for failure to report information or suspicion, regarding money
laundering or terrorist financing.
(2) The employees cooperate and report, without delay,
according to paragraph 9(1)(e), anything that comes to their
attention in relation to transactions for which there is a slight
suspicion that are related to money laundering or terrorist
financing.
(3) According to section 26 of the Law, the Obliged Entity’s
employees fulfill their legal obligation to report their suspicions
regarding money laundering and terrorist financing, after their
compliance with subparagraph (2).
Employees’
education and
training program
35. (1) The Obliged Entity ensures that its employees are fully
aware of their legal obligations according to the Law and the
present Directive, by introducing a complete employee’s
education and training program.
(2) The timing and content of the training provided to the 21.
employees of the various departments is adjusted according
to the needs of each Obliged Entity. The frequency of the
training can vary depending on to the amendments of legal
and/or regulatory requirements, employees’ duties as well as
any other changes in the financial system of the Republic.
(3) The training program aims at educating employees on the 22.
latest developments in the prevention of money laundering
and terrorist financing, including the practical methods and
trends used for this purpose.
(4) The training program has a different structure for new 23.
employees, existing employees and for different departments
of the Obliged Entity according to the services that they 
provide. On-going training is given at regular intervals so as to
ensure that the employees are reminded of their duties and
responsibilities and kept informed of any new developments. 