PART IV APPLICATION OF APPROPRIATE MEASURES AND
PROCEDURES ON A RISK BASED APPROACH
Paragraph 12 Application of measures and procedures on a risk based
approach
Paragraph 13 Identification, recording and evaluation of risks
Paragraph 14 Design and implementation of measures and procedures to
manage and mitigate the risks
Paragraph 15 Monitoring and improving the measures and procedures
Paragraph 16 Dynamic risk management
Paragraph 17 Relevant international organisations

PART IV
APPLICATION OF APPROPRIATE MEASURES AND
PROCEDURES ON A RISK BASED APPROACH

Application of
measures and
procedures on a
risk based
approach
(section 61(2) of
the Law)
12. (1) The Obliged Entity applies appropriate measures and
procedures, on a risk based approach, so as to focus its effort
in those areas where the risk of money laundering and
terrorist financing appears to be higher.
(2) A risk-based approach:
(a) recognises that the money laundering or terrorist
financing threat varies across customers, countries,
services and financial instruments;
(b) allows the board of directors to differentiate
between customers of the Obliged Entity in a way that
matches the risk of their particular business;
(c) allows the board of directors to apply its own
approach in the formulation of policies, procedures and
controls in response to the Obliged Entity’s particular
circumstances and characteristics;
(d) helps to produce a more cost effective system; and
(e) promotes the prioritisation of effort and actions of
the Obliged Entity in response to the likelihood of
money laundering or terrorist financing occurring
through the use of services provided by the Obliged
Entity.
(3) A risk-based approach involves specific measures and
procedures in assessing the most cost effective and
proportionate way to manage the money laundering and
terrorist financing risks faced by the Obliged Entity. Such
measures and procedures are:

(a) identifying and assessing the money laundering and
terrorist financing risks emanating from particular
customers, financial instruments, services, and
geographical areas of operation of the Obliged Entity
and its customers;
(b) documenting in the risk management and
procedures manual of paragraph 9(1)(c), the policies,
measures, procedures and controls to ensure their
uniform application across the Obliged Entity by
persons specifically appointed for that purpose by the
board of directors;
(c) managing and mitigating the assessed risks by the
application of appropriate and effective measures,
procedures and controls;
(d) continuous monitoring and improvements in the
effective operation of the policies, procedures and
controls.
(4) The Obliged Entities when assessing the money
laundering and terrorist financing risks and when
applying risk based measures and procedures, should
take into account, among others, the Joint Guidelines
and the Guidelines issued by the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF).
Identification,
recording and
evaluation of risks
13. (1) According to paragraph 9(1)(j), the compliance officer has
the responsibility to identify, record and evaluate all potential
risks. The successful establishment of measures and
procedures on a risk-based approach requires the clear 
communication of the measures and procedures that have
been decided across the Obliged Entity, along with robust
mechanisms to ensure that these are implemented effectively,
weaknesses are promptly identified and improvements are
made wherever necessary.
(2) A risk-based approach involves the identification,
recording and evaluation of the risks that have to be
managed. The Obliged Entity assesses and evaluates the risk
it faces, for usage of the services provided for the purpose of
money laundering or terrorist financing. The particular
circumstances of the Obliged Entity determine the suitable
procedures and measures that need to be applied to counter
and manage risk.
(3) In the cases where the services and the financial
instruments that the Obliged Entity provides are relatively
simple, involving relatively few customers, or customers with
similar characteristics, then the Obliged Entity applies
procedures that focus on those customers who fall outside the
‘norm’.
(4) The identification, recording and evaluation of risk that the
Obliged Entity face presupposes the finding of answers to the
following questions:
(a) What risk is posed by the Obliged Entity’s
customers? For example:
i. complexity of ownership structure of legal persons,
ii. companies with bearer shares,
iii. companies incorporated in offshore centres,
iv. politically exposed persons,
v. customers engaged in transactions which involves
significant amounts of cash,
vi. customers from high risk countries or from
countries known for high level of corruption or
organized crime or drug trafficking;
(b) What risk is posed by a customer’s behaviour? For
example:
i. customer transactions where there is no apparent
legal financial/commercial rationale,
ii. situations where the origin of wealth and/or source
of funds cannot be easily verified,
iii. unwillingness of customers to provide information
on the beneficial owners of a legal person;
(c) How did the customer communicate the Obliged
Entity? For example:
i. non face to face customer,
ii. customer introduced by a third person;
(d) What risk is posed by the services and financial
instruments provided to the customer? For example:
i. services that allow payments to third persons,
ii. large cash deposits or withdrawals.
(5) The application of appropriate measures and the nature
and extent of the procedures of a risk based approach
depends on different parameters. Indicative parameters are
the following:
(a) the scale and complexity of the services;
(b) geographical spread of the services and customers;
(c) the nature (e.g. non face to face customer) and
economic profile of customers as well as of financial
instruments and services offered;
(d) the distribution channels and practices of providing
services;
(e) the volume and size of transactions;
(f) the degree of risk associated with each area of
services;
(g) the country of origin and destination of customers’
funds;
(h) deviations from the anticipated level of transactions;
(i) the nature of business transactions.
Design and
implementation of
measures and
procedures to
manage and
mitigate the risks
14. (1) When the Obliged Entity identifies, according to paragraph
13, the risks it faces, then designs and implements the
appropriate measures and procedures for the correct
management and mitigation, which involve the verification of
the customers identity, the collection of information for the
construction of their economic profile and monitoring their
transactions and activities.
(2) Taking into consideration the assessed risk, an Obliged
Entity determines the type and extent of measures it adopts,
to manage and mitigate the identified risks cost effectively.
These measures and procedures may, for example, include:
(a) adaptation of the customer due diligence
procedures in respect of customers in line with their
assessed money laundering and terrorist financing risk;
(b) requiring the quality and extent of requisite
identification data for each type of customer to be of a
certain standard (e.g. documents from independent
and reliable sources, third person information,
documentary evidence );
(c) obtaining additional data and information from the
customers, where this is appropriate for the proper and
complete understanding of their activities and source of
wealth and for the effective management of any
increased risk emanating from the particular business
relationship or the occasional transaction; and
(d) on going monitoring of high risk customers’
transactions and activities.
(3) The risk assessment and the implementation of the
measures and procedures of subparagraph (2) result in the
categorisation of customers according to paragraph 7(2)(c).
The said categorisation is based on criteria which reflect the
possible risk causes and each category is accompanied with
the relevant due diligence procedures, regular monitoring and
controls.
(4) The category of low risk customers, according to
paragraph 7(2)(c)(i), includes the customers that the Obliged
Entity has determined to categorise as such according to
section 63 of the Law.
(5) The category of high risk customers, according to
paragraph 7(2)(c)(iii), includes the customers prescribed as
high risk in section 64 of the Law ,as well as, any other
customer determined by the Obliged Entity itself to be
classified as such.
(6) According to paragraph 9(1)(j), lists are prepared and
maintained for the categories of customers, which contain,
inter alia, the customers’ names, account numbers, and date
of commencement of business relationship. The said lists
should be promptly updated with all new or existing customers
that the Obliged Entity has determined, in the light of
additional information received, that fall under the categories
of paragraph 7(2)(c).
(7) The Obliged Entity is, at all times, in a position to
demonstrate to the Commission that the extent of measures
and control procedures that applies are proportionate to the
risk it faces for the use of services provided, for the purpose
of money laundering or terrorist financing.
(8) In view of this, documenting the measures and procedures
set out in subparagraphs 2-6 above will assist the Obliged
Entity to prove:
(a) the ways used to identify, record and assess the
risk of its services being used for money laundering or
terrorist financing;
(b) how it has determined the introduction and
implementation of specific measures and procedures 
for the management and mitigation of risks; and
(c) the methods applied for monitoring and improving,
whenever deemed necessary, the specific measures,
procedures and controls.
Monitoring and
improving the
measures and
procedures
15. The Obliged Entity monitors and evaluates, on an on going
basis, the effectiveness of the measures and procedures that
have been introduced for compliance purposes with the
present Part.
Dynamic risk
management
16. Risk management is a continuous process, carried out on a
dynamic basis. Risk assessment is not an isolated event of a
limited duration. Customers’ activities change as well as the
services and financial instruments provided by the Obliged
Entity change. The same happens to the financial instruments
and the transactions used for money laundering or terrorist
financing. The measures, the procedures and controls are
kept under regular review so that risks resulting from changes
in the characteristics of existing customers, new customers,
services and financial instruments are managed and
countered effectively.
Relevant
international
organisations
17. On implementing appropriate measures and procedures on a
risk based approach, and on implementing the customer
identification and due diligence procedures, according to Part
V, the compliance officer, ο λειτουργός συμμόρφωσης
should consult data, information and reports [e.g. customers
from countries which inadequately apply Financial Action Task
Force’s (FATF), country assessment reports] that are
published in following relevant organisations:
(a) FATF - www.fatf-gafi.org·
(b) the Council of Europe Select Committee of Experts
on the Evaluation of Anti-Money Laundering
Measures (MONEYVAL) - www.coe.int/moneyval·
(c) the EU Common Foreign & Security Policy (CFSP)-
http://ec.europa.eu/external_relations/cfsp/sanctions/lis
t/consol-list.htm·
(d) the UN Security Council Sanctions Committees -
www.un.org/sc/committees/·
(e) the International Money Laundering Information
Network (IMOLIN) - www.imolin.org·
(f) the International Monetary Fund (IMF) –
www.imf.org.
(g) the Joint Committee European Supervisory
Authorities - https://esas-joint-committee.europa.eu/
(h) the Ministry of Foreign Affairs regarding the United
Nations Security Council Resolutions or Decisions
(Sanctions) or/and the European Union Council
Decisions and Regulations (Restrictive Measures) -
http://www.mfa.gov.cy/mfa/mfa2016.nsf/mfa35_en/mfa
35_en?OpenDocument
(i) the EU Sanctions Map -
https://www.sanctionsmap.eu/#/main.