THIRD APPENDIX
EXAMPLES OF SUSPICIOUS TRANSACTIONS/ACTIVITIES RELATED TO
MONEY LAUNDERING AND TERRORIST FINANCING
Α. MONEY LAUNDERING
1. Transactions with no discernible purpose or are unnecessarily complex.
2. Use of foreign accounts of companies or group of companies with complicated
ownership structure which is not justified based on the needs and economic profile
of the customer.
3. The transactions or the size of the transactions requested by the customer do not
comply with his usual practice and business activity.
4. Large volume of transactions and/or money deposited or credited into, an account
when the nature of the customer’s business activities would not appear to justify
such activity.
5. The business relationship involves only one transaction or it has a short duration.
6. There is no visible justification for a customer using the services of a particular
Obliged Entity. For example the customer is situated far away from the particular
Obliged Entity and in a place where he could be provided services by another
Obliged Entity.
7. There are frequent transactions in the same financial instrument without obvious
reason and in conditions that appear unusual (churning).
8. There are frequent small purchases of a particular financial instrument by a
customer who settles in cash, and then the total number of the financial instrument
is sold in one transaction with settlement in cash or with the proceeds being
transferred, with the customer’s instructions, in an account other than his usual
account.
9. Any transaction the nature, size or frequency appear to be unusual, e.g. cancellation
of an order, particularly after the deposit of the consideration.
10. Transactions which are not in line with the conditions prevailing in the market, in
relation, particularly, with the size of the order and the frequency.
11. The settlement of any transaction but mainly large transactions, in cash.
12. Settlement of the transaction by a third person which is different than the customer
which gave the order.
13. Instructions of payment to a third person that does not seem to be related with the
instructor.
14. Transfer of funds to and from countries or geographical areas which do not apply or
they apply inadequately FATF’s recommendations on money laundering and
terrorist financing.
15. A customer is reluctant to provide complete information when establishes a
business relationship about the nature and purpose of its business activities,
anticipated account activity, prior relationships with Financial Organisations, names
of its officers and directors, or information on its business location. The customer
usually provides minimum or misleading information that is difficult or expensive for
the Obliged Entity to verify.
16. A customer provides unusual or suspicious identification documents that cannot be
readily verified.
17. A customer’s home/business telephone is disconnected.
18. A customer that makes frequent or large transactions and has no record of past or
present employment experience.
19. Difficulties or delays on the submission of the financial statements or other
identification documents, of a customer/legal person.
20. A customer who has been introduced by a foreign Obliged Entity, or by a third
person whose countries or geographical areas of origin do not apply or they apply
inadequately FATF’s recommendations on money laundering and terrorist financing.
21. Shared address for individuals involved in cash transactions, particularly when the
address is also a business location and/or does not seem to correspond to the
stated occupation (e.g. student, unemployed, self-employed, etc).
22. The stated occupation of the customer is not commensurate with the level or size of
the executed transactions.
23. Financial transactions from non-profit or charitable organisations for which there
appears to be no logical economic purpose or in which there appears to be no link
between the stated activity of the organisation and the other parties in the
transaction.
24. Unexplained inconsistencies arising during the process of identifying and verifying
the customer (e.g. previous or current country of residence, country of issue of the
identification document, countries visited according to the passport, documents
furnished to confirm name, address and date of birth etc).
25. Complex trust or nominee network.
26. Transactions or company structures established or working with an unneeded
commercial way. e.g. companies with bearer shares or bearer financial instruments
or use of a postal box.
27. Use of general nominee documents in a way that restricts the control exercised by
the company’s board of directors.
28. Changes in the lifestyle of employees of the Obliged Entity, e.g. luxurious way of life
or avoiding being out of office due to holidays.
29. Changes the performance and the behaviour of the employees of the Obliged Entity